YNU-82: app sessions guide (#40)
layer-3/docs: docs/learn/beginner/app-session-management.md

---
sidebar_position: 1
title: App Session Management
description: Complete guide to yellow application lifecycle management, stages, and operations
keywords: [app session, yellow application, lifecycle, stages, operations, nitrolite, clearnode]
---

# App Session Management

> App sessions in the Yellow network enable secure, off-chain computation with on-chain settlement. This guide covers the complete lifecycle of app sessions, from creation through various operational stages to closure.

Reviewer: > ... off-chain computation with on-chain settlement.

The settlement is not necessarily on chain as closing app session just redistributes allocation to unified balances. I think you can add "optional" in-between "on-chain" and "settlement" to clarify this moment.

Author: c63a1c796a3bfd6c355b558b440d1f923b61d7a8

## Session Lifecycle Overview

App sessions follow a structured lifecycle with distinct stages and operations:

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[Create Session] --> B[Open]
    B --> C[Submit States]
    C --> C
    C --> D[Close Session]
    D --> E[Closed]
```

## Session Stages

### 1. Creation Stage

> The initial stage where participants establish a yellow app with agreed-upon parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The initial stage where participants establish an application session with an optional yellow app (that can dictate state update rules) with agreed-upon parameters.
```

**Key Requirements:**
- All participants with non-zero allocations must sign the creation request
- Protocol must be specified (`NitroRPC/0.4`)
- Signature weights and quorum must be defined
- Initial allocations must be provided

**Stage Characteristics:**
- Status: `open`
- Version: Initial (1)
- Participants: Fixed set established
- Assets: Initial allocations locked

### 2. Operational Stage

> Minimal protocol version: `NitroRPC/0.4`. Older app protocol versions do not support intents and execute Operate sub-operation for all requests.

Reviewer: I would make "stage characteristics" and "sub-operations" headers, and move the commented line to the latter section.

Author: c63a1c796a3bfd6c355b558b440d1f923b61d7a8

**Stage Characteristics:**
- Status: `open`
- Version: Incrementing with each state update
- State Changes: Continuous based on application logic
- Signature Requirements: Quorum-based validation

**Sub-operations:**
Defined by Intent introduces with protocol version [`NitroRPC/0.4`](#nitrorpc04-current). Applications using older protocol versions do not support intents and execute `Operate` sub-operation for all requests.

- **Operate**: Redistribute existing session funds
- **Deposit**: Add funds from participants' unified balances
- **Withdraw**: Remove funds to participants' unified balances

### 3. Closure Stage

The final phase where the session is terminated, and final allocations are settled.

**Stage Characteristics:**
- Status: `open` → `closed`
- Final State: Immutable after closure
- Settlement: All funds distributed according to final allocations

> ## Core Operations

Reviewer: I think that we need to mention that this relates to Clearnode.

Author: c63a1c796a3bfd6c355b558b440d1f923b61d7a8

Reviewer: 06c5d26267e88a3825aec535f9143484d8c29d60
Resolved myself.

      "participants": [
        "0xAaBbCcDdEeFf0011223344556677889900aAbBcC",
        "0x00112233445566778899AaBbCcDdEeFf00112233"
      ],
      "weights": [50, 50],
      "quorum": 100,
      "challenge": 86400,
      "nonce": 1
    },
    "allocations": [
      {
        "participant": "0xAaBbCcDdEeFf0011223344556677889900aAbBcC",
        "asset": "usdc",
        "amount": "100.0"
      },
      {
        "participant": "0x00112233445566778899AaBbCcDdEeFf00112233",
        "asset": "usdc",
        "amount": "100.0"
      }
    ],
    "session_data": "{\"gameType\":\"chess\",\"timeControl\":{\"initial\":600,\"increment\":5}}"
  }, 1619123456789],
  "sig": ["0x9876fedcba..."]
}
```

#### NitroRPC/0.4 (Current)
Enhanced version with explicit versioning and improved state management allowing for optional deposits and withdrawals.

**Key Differences:**
- Required `version` field for state consistency
- Enhanced allocation validation
- Improved error handling

**Creation Requirements:**
- **Participants**: All participants with non-zero allocations must sign
- **Weights**: Signature weights determining voting power
- **Quorum**: Minimum signature weight threshold for operations

> - **Challenge Period**: Time window for dispute resolution (seconds)

Reviewer: Aren't these true for v0.2 as well? If so, let's locate them before both v0.2 and v0.4, implying that they are shared.

Author: c63a1c796a3bfd6c355b558b440d1f923b61d7a8

- **Session Data**: Optional application-specific metadata

### Submit Application State

Updates the session state during the operational stage.

#### Intent-Based Operations ([NitroRPC/0.4](#nitrorpc04-current))

The `intent` field specifies the purpose of the state update. An important concept is that the `allocations` you provide are not the *change* in funds, but rather the **final desired app balance state** for each participant after the operation.

> **Operate Intent** - Redistribute session funds:

Reviewer: Let's use L5 heading for all intents, so that it is semantically correct and they can be anchored

Author: c63a1c796a3bfd6c355b558b440d1f923b61d7a8

**Example:**
Suppose the current session state (from the `operate` example above) is:

  - Participant A (`0xA...C`): `75.0` usdc
  - Participant B (`0x0...3`): `125.0` usdc

Now, Participant A wants to deposit `50.0` usdc, and Participant B also wants to deposit `50.0` usdc.

**Calculation:**

  - Participant A's new total allocation = `75.0` (current) + `50.0` (deposit) = `125.0`
  - Participant B's new total allocation = `125.0` (current) + `50.0` (deposit) = `175.0`

You must submit these **updated amounts** in the `allocations` array.

```json
{
  "req": [1, "submit_app_state", {
    "app_session_id": "0x3456789012abcdef...",
    "intent": "deposit",
    "version": 3,
    "allocations": [
      {
        "participant": "0xAaBbCcDdEeFf0011223344556677889900aAbBcC",
        "asset": "usdc",
        "amount": "125.0"
      },
      {
        "participant": "0x00112233445566778899AaBbCcDdEeFf00112233",
        "asset": "usdc",
        "amount": "175.0"
      }
    ]
  }, 1619123456789],
  "sig": ["0x9876fedcba...", "0x8765fedcba..."]
}
```

> **Important**: Any participant making a deposit must be a signer of the request, in addition to meeting the overall signature quorum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Important**: Any participant making a deposit must be a signer of the request, in addition to the state meeting the overall signature quorum.
```

  - Participant A (`0xA...C`): `125.0` usdc
  - Participant B (`0x0...3`): `175.0` usdc

Now, Participant A wants to withdraw `25.0` usdc, and Participant B also wants to withdraw `25.0` usdc.

**Calculation:**

  - Participant A's new total allocation = `125.0` (current) - `25.0` (withdraw) = `100.0`
  - Participant B's new total allocation = `175.0` (current) - `25.0` (withdraw) = `150.0`

You must submit these **final amounts** in the `allocations` array.

```json
{
  "req": [1, "submit_app_state", {
    "app_session_id": "0x3456789012abcdef...",
    "intent": "withdraw",
    "version": 4,
    "allocations": [
      {
        "participant": "0xAaBbCcDdEeFf0011223344556677889900aAbBcC",
        "asset": "usdc",
        "amount": "100.0"
      },
      {
        "participant": "0x00112233445566778899AaBbCcDdEeFf00112233",
        "asset": "usdc",
        "amount": "150.0"
      }
    ]
  }, 1619123456789],
  "sig": ["0x9876fedcba...", "0x8765fedcba..."]
}
```

**State Update Requirements:**
- **Quorum**: Sum of signer weights must meet threshold
- **Version**: Must specify expected next version number
- **Allocations**: Must comply with intent-specific rules

> - **Signatures**: Required signers depend on operation type

Reviewer: Let's move these before describing different intents, so that it is clear that these rules are common.

Author: c63a1c796a3bfd6c355b558b440d1f923b61d7a8

---
sidebar_position: 1
title: App Session Management
description: Complete guide to yellow application lifecycle management, stages, and operations
keywords: [app session, yellow application, lifecycle, stages, operations, nitrolite, clearnode]
---

# App Session Management

App sessions in the Yellow network enable secure, off-chain computation with on-chain settlement. This guide covers the complete lifecycle of app sessions, from creation through various operational stages to closure.

## Session Lifecycle Overview

App sessions follow a structured lifecycle with distinct stages and operations:

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[Create Session] --> B[Open]
    B --> C[Submit States]
    C --> C
    C --> D[Close Session]
    D --> E[Closed]
```

## Session Stages

### 1. Creation Stage

The initial stage where participants establish a yellow app with agreed-upon parameters.

**Key Requirements:**
- All participants with non-zero allocations must sign the creation request

> - Protocol must be specified (`NitroRPC/0.2` or `NitroRPC/0.4`)

Reviewer 2: We should reference here the sections on this page
Maybe later it would be good to have a separate page per protocol

Author: b2bdbbffbffa5c27dfbc7906fc236e7330d065da

- Signature weights and quorum must be defined
- Initial allocations must be provided

**Stage Characteristics:**
- Status: `open`
- Version: Initial (1)
- Participants: Fixed set established
- Assets: Initial allocations locked

> ### 2. Operational Stage

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure whether it needs to be explained here, as we can expect protocols to be totally different

Author: 9e69248c18739da38228eb41aaf830d9e1ba60eb

Author: I made a small clarification here regarding behaviours in current supported protocols. In the future we can have a separate section for supported protocols with descriptions. For now, while we have only one protocol but different versions, i think there is no need in this explanation

      "quorum": 100,
      "challenge": 86400,
      "nonce": 1
    },
    "allocations": [
      {
        "participant": "0xAaBbCcDdEeFf0011223344556677889900aAbBcC",
        "asset": "usdc",
        "amount": "100.0"
      },
      {
        "participant": "0x00112233445566778899AaBbCcDdEeFf00112233",
        "asset": "usdc",
        "amount": "100.0"
      }
    ],
    "session_data": "{\"gameType\":\"chess\",\"timeControl\":{\"initial\":600,\"increment\":5}}"
  }, 1619123456789],
  "sig": ["0x9876fedcba..."]
}
```

#### NitroRPC/0.4 (Current)
Enhanced version with improved state management and explicit versioning.

**Key Differences:**
- Required `version` field for state consistency
- Enhanced allocation validation
- Improved error handling

**Creation Requirements:**
- **Participants**: All participants with non-zero allocations must sign
- **Weights**: Signature weights determining voting power
- **Quorum**: Minimum signature weight threshold for operations
- **Challenge Period**: Time window for dispute resolution (seconds)
- **Session Data**: Optional application-specific metadata

### Submit Application State

Updates the session state during the operational stage.

> #### Intent-Based Operations (NitroRPC/0.4)

Reviewer 2: It is not clear for me how to work with `deposit` and `withdraw` intents, where I specify the amount?

Author: 9e69248c18739da38228eb41aaf830d9e1ba60eb

Reviewer 2: Still not clear(

Reviewer 2: Ah, I believe you meant b2bdbbffbffa5c27dfbc7906fc236e7330d065da

## Session Data Management

### Application-Specific Metadata

The optional `session_data` field enables applications to maintain custom state throughout the session lifecycle:

**Gaming Example:**
```json
{
  "gameType": "chess",
  "timeControl": {"initial": 600, "increment": 5},
  "gameState": "in_progress",
  "currentTurn": "0xAaBbCcDdEeFf0011223344556677889900aAbBcC",
  "moveHistory": ["e2e4", "e7e5", "Nf3", "Nc6"],
  "capturedPieces": {"white": ["p"], "black": []}
}
```

**Trading Example:**
```json
{
  "marketType": "prediction",
  "question": "Will BTC exceed $50k by end of month?",
  "positions": [
    {"participant": "0xAaBb...", "side": "yes", "amount": "100"},
    {"participant": "0x0011...", "side": "no", "amount": "100"}
  ],
  "oracleSource": "chainlink",
  "settlementDate": "2024-01-31T23:59:59Z"
}
```

### State Evolution

Session data evolves through the operational stages:

1. **Creation**: Initial configuration and rules
2. **Operation**: Dynamic state updates reflecting application logic
3. **Closure**: Final results and outcomes

## Error Handling & Edge Cases

### Common Error Scenarios

**Insufficient Signatures:**
```json
{
  "error": {

>     "code": -32600,

Reviewer 2: What?! Do we have codes?

Author: AI... b2bdbbffbffa5c27dfbc7906fc236e7330d065da
